Monmouth Enterprise Intrapreneurship School (IS)
	Audition Day 14 October 2011
	

	Time 
	Task
	Objective
	Resources
	9-9:30 Arrival


	On arrival prospects will sign in and write on a post-it something about themselves that is interesting but not known to others
	For post-lunch refresher
	Post-its – 10 each of a colour
	9:30 Introduction to the day
	Explain outline for the day – not all about IS at this stage
	To provide prospects with an insight as to why they are here, albeit slightly ambiguous
	Flipchart or Ppt?
	9:45
Building Trust
	Blindfold game. Prospects paired up, Given common identifying word (city name) and separated to different part of room.  Sighted person cannot move and must guide blind to them using only code word and direction words. Swap sides and do again.  If there is time we can do the ‘Silly Cow’ exercise.
	To challenge prospects with non standard LA behaviour. Introduce idea of game dynamics.
	Scarves


(post its)
	10:15
Prospects’ Introduction 
	Pairs – move them around by number.
1.Prospects say who they are and where they work (but not title/position)
2. Prospects tell story of their best or worst experience of public service (5-10 minutes each) 
3.Partner takes notes – think about characters who appear and the episodes that occur - then swap
4. Feedback about their partner to whole group
	To begin to familiarize the group with each other and begin to get a measure of who is in the room – will introduce prospects to the use of narrative that will be built on during the rest of the IS experience
	Flipchart with question:
Tell your partner about a time when… what happened?


Pen/paper
	11:15
Why are you here?


(Break 15mins at some point during exercise)
	4 groups – again, by number.
1. start individually – prospects will write a paragraph as to why they think they were chosen to be in the room and how they feel about being chosen – include things about themselves that may have been the reason for this (5-10 minutes)
2. present to the group in turn – rest of group write on post-it’s the themes that appear and the feelings being expressed (10 minutes each)
3. stick all post-its on a wall then agree on grouping into common themes and feelings.
4. Quickly rotate groups to look at what others have recorded (2 minutes each)
5. Discuss in whole group what themes and feelings came out – what was common and what was different – what stood out and what was a surprise?
	To begin to explore who the prospects are and what the dynamics are in the group, and the individual learning styles that are apparent – also what archetypes are beginning to emerge, and how much freedom is being felt in the space?
	Post-its and pens
Flipchart to record discussion
	12:15
Narrative Construction
	What would really good look like? Individual stories - prospects will develop a narrative (either in words or via imagery) to describe an alternative reality where things are really excellent
	To test capacity to identify objectives currently beyond the current structural horizons. Measure of vision.
	Flip Chart Pad / Paper / Pens
	12:45-13:45 Lunch
	

	

	

	13:45
Refresher
	Each participant to pick a post-it that interests them – and note down why.
Then prospects stand and say what their ‘interesting thing’ was – after which the person who has this post-it says what they found interesting about this story.
	

	

	14:00
Monmouth Mindmap
	Part One:
1. 4 groups of 5. Refer back to earlier session about public service experience – this time in groups each tell a story of their worst or best experience whilst working at Monmouth.  
2. Whilst story being told, other note down what characters  appear in the story, what subjects or issues appear and what actions/behaviours are exhibited.
3.  Discuss the above and write a post-it for each you agree on (e.g. a yellow post-it for ‘citizen’, or ‘boss’; a pink post-it for ‘complaint’ or ‘letter received’; a green post-it for ‘frustration’ or ‘pride’


Part 2:
2 groups: 2 tables.
1.Spread out the post-its on the tables.  Discuss and cluster into groups that have commonality. Give each group a title that sums it up in the best way possible. Take away the original post-its and keep titles.
2. Swap tables – for each title write on another post-it a positive and negative attribute, e.g.
 - for character clusters, what their best friend and worst enemy would say about them
 - for subject/issue clusters, what an optimist might say about the theme and what a
pessimist might say
 - for action/behaviour clusters, what someone who values the thing positively might say and
what someone who values the thing negatively might say.  Remove the original titles.
3. Swap-tables – cluster the responses into groups – what title would you give each cluster?


Part 3:
Group discussion – what emerged from this exercise?  




	The purpose of this exercise is to explore emergent properties that exist within the organisation.  For example, clustering of characters might reveal archetypes, subjects/issues might reveal  themes, and actions/behaviours might reveal values within the organization.
This should stimulate discussion that is based around anecdotal evidence and narrative and lead to the beginnings of a better awareness of the underlying nature of the organization.
	Flipchart with instructions


Post-its (4 colours)


Pens


Tables
	15:00 break
	

	

	

	15:15 to 15.45
Problem identification
	In groups of 3
Prospects articulate their ‘problem’ and in groups they do a ‘5 why’s’ analysis to challenge the validity of the problem identified
Introduction to the spider model
	To discover the range and substance of problems faced by prospects and to introduce the idea of seeking the underlying root causes
	Spider Diagrams 


	15.45 to 16.30
Problem Analysis and challenge
	Prospects spend 15 minutes populating their spider diagrams.  Then they have 10 minutes each (4 minutes presentation and 6 minutes discussion) to present their diagram to the group and have their assumptions challenged by other group members. 
	To provide an analytical model to map out the dimensions of the problem.
Observe prospects’ capacity to present ideas, take challenge, and contribute constructive criticsm. 
	

	16:30
Next Steps
	Outline what happens next for those selected to go forward to IS
	

	

	16:50
	Group selection
Each prospect writes down the 10 names of people they would nominate to go forward.
	Introduce concept of community validation
	Index Cards
	17:00 Close